irreducible e every political ideology
is individual is that it has to be about
me it has to be about you and it has to
be about us you would have to be blind
deaf and dumb to ignore that beauty and
promises of beauty promises that you
will become more beautiful have had a
massive galvanizing effect on this
movement and those are based on
scientism I hope this video is look back
on and 10 years from now and laughed at
I hope veganism is so highly evolved 10
years from now that people look back and
find it incomprehensible that beauty and
weight loss and health advice and these
these scientific factoids that they will
ever see as central and crucially
important to beacon
hey what's up this video is in some ways
a sequel to reflections that were in an
earlier monologue here that is titled
beauty is meaningless those themes have
come up again again on this channel but
this video is also a direct sequel to a
video I just recorded that's also in
sepia tone I'm reflecting on the role of
science in veganism in 2016 so in the
video that you may have just watched
five minutes ago I was reflecting on the
question of whether or not science
itself is really something integral to
veganism or if it's something incidental
whereas the core of the ISM is ethical
and ecological now in this video I'll
ask what seems like an easy question
about beauty but the reality is the
promises based on science that have
redefined veganism in the last 10 years
shall we say haha they are scientistic
promises of health and beauty it would
be impossible to underestimate the
significance of beauty the cult of
beauty the myth of beauty that you will
be beautiful that you will be made
beautiful by veganism in what this diet
and this social movement have become
unless you've been tremendously powerful
and again I've reflected in past videos
back in the year two thousand one it
wasn't like that at all animal rights
and like a proto veganism it was then
just you know the word vegetarian was
really used not vegan you know it was
based on outrage over vivisection over
puppies being used in experiments there
was this whole discourse of people
wanting to get back to the land of a
more authentic less technological less
industrialized way of life there were
various forms of rebellion I remember
when I was talking about it with another
youtuber violent vegan he was saying you
know yeah these were the people who
duh you know crawl through a hole in the
fat fence at the glastonbury festival it
was influenced by anarchist political
ideals it was about everything except
beauty yeah I'd like again 2001 is not
that long ago but the idea that animal
rights had anything to do with beauty
was was very very distant then and again
the the notions with in ecology that
were prevalent were totally different
like the idea of ecology back then the
main concern was actually rainforest was
preserving woodland preserving timber
preserving trees forested areas species
habitat preventing species exceeds those
are the big ideas today most of that has
been forgotten the ecology is thought of
in terms of gaseous emissions almost
exclusively I mean the discourse in
veganism today is dominated by beauty
fitness health carbon dioxide emissions
only a couple of other themes and it's
amazing how marginal even vivisection is
because I've said in this channel people
accuse me of being pro vivisection who
else is even talking about vivisection I
anyway I wish there was a richer more
intellectually rigorous deeper engaged
with these issues but for right now you
would have to be blind deaf and dumb to
ignore that beauty and promises of
beauty promises that you will become
more beautiful have had a massive
galvanizing effect on this movement and
those are based on scientism not science
but scientistic thinking theorizing
anecdotes now I've just come through
warning my audience again it's the theme
of photo many times the science is so
estranged from the social perception of
the science that we're really talking
about politics and not science most of
the time you know and with human beauty
it gets even more surreal I was in
England I think at two different points
during the decade when one woman
absolutely represented the pinnacle
beauty in that culture and that woman is
Nigella Lawson now if you're American
even you cannot imagine the me Nia the
power this woman had the iconic presence
as a beauty icon Nigella Lawson had for
about 10 years in the British Isles and
like if you're too young to remember it
you don't know if you're too old if you
weren't paying attention you know but I
mean she was more of a dominant beauty
icon in England for about 10 years then
Marilyn Monroe ever had been in the
United States and if you don't believe
me let me tell you Marilyn Monroe she's
much exaggerated because of you know she
died young and there were you know she
had a love affair with the president
united states there are different
reasons why she's become remembered as
if she were unique i computed but the
reality is every week Marilyn Monroe had
a movie in the theaters there were a
hundred other beautiful women competing
for that same iconic role but Nigella
Lawson and again this relates to
veganism more ways than one one of the
reasons why she was so potent and
powerful an image of beauty was that she
was an excuse for people to indulge in
their bad habits so Nigella Lawson
represented not just physical beauty but
the idea that you could be physically
beautiful while eating chocolate and
decadent desserts and well being a good
housewife and a good mother and cooking
like I don't know poached eggs of you
know muffins whatever I mean this you
know this is the so-called revival of
English cuisine if you believe there is
such a thing on this earth as in English
cuisine shepherd's pie and all that huh
um but I mean she played to the audience
is yearning to believe that diet and
exercise were not so important that you
could be beautiful that you could again
she was celebrated as the pinnacle of
beauty while literally sneaking into
your pantry and pigging out she used the
word pigging out on snacks and so on
down there uh
ah Nigella Lawson if you now look back
objectively if you just do a google
image search for like Nigella Lawson
young or youth what she look like as a
young woman actually when she was slim
there are some pictures up you know
ethnically she's not that different from
myself I believe she's of mixed Jewish
and British ancestry issues of you know
Western European Jewish ancestry that in
reality is you know if mixed with
somebody from the British Isles uh you
know like when I look at the pictures of
her when she was a young woman she could
be one of my cousins and if she were my
cousin you know I'd say there was
nothing wrong with her when you look at
those pictures he's not bad looking but
it's such a contrast to see the cultural
value of the beauty icon that was
foisted on to her actually when she was
a middle-aged one when she was
relatively old for a beauty icon and the
reality of who she was as just an ok
looking person someone who was not born
with tremendous beauty or what have you
but a powerful cultural set of symbols
were attached to her about the meaning
of life about the good life about being
a good mother and a good cook and and
being good in the sense of enjoying your
life self-indulgence the Aristotelian
idea of the good life tremendously
powerful and of course she had the best
hair and makeup and professional
photography and she was made to appear
much more beautiful than she was and you
know I just say by the standards of
anyone who appears on television by the
standards of the woman who reads the
news or gives you the weather forecast
she never biologically had any great
advantage in being a one of the great
natural beauties of her era nevertheless
if you're honest with yourself you can
remember in England she was absolutely
the dominant beauty icon for a long
period of time
and people do respond to that whether
they'll admit it to themselves or not
people latch on to those figures they
latch on to the anecdotes about health
and science that come out of that
whether it's these little things like oh
you know chocolate is good for you oh
you know a glass of wine every day is
good for you every glass of wine causes
brain damage each and every one every
dose of alcohol causes brain damage
don't kid yourself you never get those
brain cells back your brain will try to
repair itself you'll get some new brain
cells but they're not the same ones you
had before every time you fall down a
flight of stairs on your head you also
get brain damage the ideal the optimal
dosage of alcohol is zero don't
compromise don't kid yourself but there
are all these powerful things in our
culture inviting us to kid ourselves and
you know the male counterpart I actually
wanted to contrast or two because I mean
this is I hope I don't to say more about
that if you don't know this from
experience people do change their lives
in response to a beauty icon like that
people cook differently eat differently
women raise their children differently
women feed their husbands differently
and men who are not yet married look for
a different kind of wife I wonder I'll
bet you could interview guys from this
from my generation in England I'll bet
you could interview guys if they were
honest they would say when they finish
University they were trying to marry a
woman like Nigella Lawson because she
was so much more powerful than just
someone who was like a singer as a sex
symbol because she brought together you
know the household the cooking the image
of the independent professional so many
you know and of course affluence and
self-indulgence there's so much packing
into this you know maternity as well as
beauty and vitality all these things in
one in one cultural product that
everyone in the British Isles was was
lining up to buy you know another one
that again you can google in five
seconds I don't think I need to insert
images here you know the singer Iggy Pop
Iggy Pop who is only now fading from
memory because his fame was so huge for
such a long time I'm sure in his later
years I assume he did use steroids or
testosterone or other
performance-enhancing drugs but you know
in his early years his physique was
definitely natural except for the the
performance enhancing drug of heroin he
was a heroin addict for a tremendous a
long time Iggy Pop his whole career he
performed nearly naked you know at least
with no shirt on but he would wear very
revealing attire and he was a sex symbol
on a scale that again is difficult for
people to imagine today Iggy Pop was
adored by heterosexual women he was
adored by gay men it was definitely a
beauty icon for the gay community and
straight men wanted to emulate him and
he knows because he's talked to people
who've told them you know an interview
so he reflects in this there were people
who started using heroin because they
wanted to look like Iggy Pop because
they wanted to imitate this rock star he
was a vocalist he was a singer as an
icon of beauty and those are two
contrasting examples but God it shows
the power Beauty has to transform
society you know and to change people's
lives sometimes damaging them horribly
like I know it may just seem like a joke
oh you know people watch Nigella Lawson
and they started cooking eggs for
breakfast and before they didn't before
they just ate breakfast cereal but it's
no joke you really think about the
knock-on implications of that you think
about the millions of chickens battery
hens living in cages through the British
Isles you think I mean you know and it
was I remember there were newspaper
articles saying that grocery stores were
ordering more eggs and the grocery
stores that had sold out of eggs because
Nigella Lawson's TV show had encouraged
so many people in England to cook eggs
like never before and that people were
going back to the type of diet that had
been out of fashion since world war two
or since the 1960s the people were
eating more eggs and more bacon you know
it's it may sound harmless but there is
harm there is vodka wouldn't be vegan if
I didn't believe there was real
arm that comes out of that even though
it may seem as as cute as anything else
that's put on TV and I mean in the case
of beauty icon like Iggy Pop or Charlie
Parker Charlie Parker was a jazz
musician known as bird his nickname was
bird of the bird you know bird he knew
he encountered it he encountered people
who wanted to be jazz musicians who
started using heroin so they could
imitate Charlie Parker and his his
charisma his just his face he was a
handsome guy his status he wasn't a sex
symbol in the same scale as as Iggy Pop
but definitely for musicians that
generation I think they all knew
somebody who started using heroin to
imitate Charlie Parker and it would
probably depending on what's seen you
weren't you if you were if you were old
enough to remember the 1970s you
probably knew people who got involved
with hard drugs because they were
influenced by Iggy Pop so I mean it's a
sad and strange and terrifying thing
what I said before about science is that
interesting set of reflections to look
back and realize something that seems so
central to veganism as its presented
today really is ancillary really is
something peripheral it's not essential
it's not Central what the core of
veganism today really is the same as
what the core veganism would have been
2,000 years ago 3,000 years ago in
ancient philosophy whether we were
presenting it in India or China or
ancient Greece or ancient Rome the core
of the message has to be do this because
it's the right thing to do but on the
other hand looking at it a little bit
more sociologically the question of what
kind of society do we want to have and
what kind of people do we want to be
that's where both the power the power of
beauty in a sense can be contrasted to
the power of veganism is a social
for me I do not want to be a part of a
society that's built on mindless murder
I do not want to be part of society that
averts its gaze that chooses to live in
ignorance to look away from the horror
of pigs living their entire lives on
concrete in a steel cage having the
throat cut etc whatever example of a
factory farm you want to use to me
that's not a society I want to be a part
of and in terms of virtue ethics to the
man I want to be I refuse to be that man
I refuse to be complicit I refused to be
passive I refuse to accept that so I
reject that culture I reject those
cultural values I reject in a sense the
man I used to be I reject who I was you
know before i became vegetariana before
i became vegan and i embarked on a
journey of personal change that
inevitably seeks its counterpart in
social change but the same thing is
happening in other directions all the
time even just inspired by beauty people
see Nigella Lawson and they see
sophistication affluence beauty
self-indulgence and they really feel
there are women who looked at that image
on television and they said that's the
kind of woman I want to be there were
men who said I want that to be my wife
etc I was not one of them I was not
seduced let me tell you um and and they
also believed just as passionately that
is the society they want to be a part of
they want to be a part of a society of
women who wake up in the morning and
make bacon and eggs for their husband
and you know it's not hard to see what
seductive about that in terms of
conservative social values there are
many things that that pull at the human
heart that way and whatever with people
like Iggy Pop the image of freedom
potency power again sophistication but
above all else beauty
yeah it's a powerful and dangerous
component of what we've been playing
with so look I hope this video is looked
back on 10 years from now and laughed at
I hope veganism is so highly evolved 10
years from now that people look back and
find it incomprehensible that beauty and
weight loss and health advice and these
these scientific factoids that they were
ever seen as central and crucially
important to veganism but right now in
2016 I've got to recognize that it's the
most powerful aspect of veganism that
the difference between 2001 2016 and
large part has been the motivating force
that weight loss beauty and that
changing self-perception I've brought to
the game and the worst part of that is
it's it's both the type of people who
become the early adopters and their
motivations in moving forward this is a
distinctive thing that marks us bday
that unifies us that shows who's really
vegan is not is that you are willing to
face up to that truth witnessing that
truth and admitting it to yourself how
terrible and how terrifying it being a
witness to the grim reality of animal
agriculture a massive scale that's what
makes us vegan that's what we have in
Congress not bicycles not bikinis not
yoga not even you know your food
preferences
irreducible in every political ideology
is individual is there it has to be
about me it has to be about you and has
to be about us even insane
semi-religious political movements like
communism that deny the existence of
individual of course they rely on
individuals believing in this caring
about this being motivated by this doing
the right thing veganism is no different
yes it is about the individual is about
self-interest but there are selfish
motives that are a part of it that
animate it and move it forward but
unlike many other movements it's an
ethics it is an ethos if you like it's
an ethical system that has this
cosmological dimension precisely because
we don't want to live like the Amish we
don't want to live as an isolated
religious community separated from the
rest of society the point is not that we
want to rent 40 acres and say well on
these 40 acres there aren't any animals
being executed inevitably this is a
political movement that has the desire
to shut down the factory farms every